Divisions in American politics are often
played out on college campuses.
Free,
>> but actions by the Trump administration
against some of America's top
universities are unprecedented.
>> I think Harvard's a disgrace.
>> Trump likes big shiny objects that have
lots of prestige and lots of name
recognition. So, it's not surprising
that he's going after Harvard. As the
oldest university in America, the
Harvard Corporation predates the
founding of the United States. It's sort
of considered the pinnacle of of
everything that we've prioritized on
education in this country. And so, I
think if you're trying to remake higher
education, then that is an obvious place
to start.
>> Many of those students were
troublemakers caused by the radical left
lunatics in this country. Trump and his
administration are using their levers of
the federal government to really extract
concessions from Harvard and make an
example of them for higher education at
large.
>> And the administration has plenty of
leverage.
>> Billions of dollars in federal
government grants and contracts have
been cancelled. A lot is at stake for
Harvard, including its place as a home
for scientific research, also
potentially its reputation globally. Two
pillars of American society are going
head-to-head, and the results could have
profound effects on universities
nationwide.
>> If Harvard can't fight back, then who
can? Ladies and gentlemen, please take
your seats. The fight has just begun.
[Applause]
[Music]
The time has come to reclaim our once
great educational institutions from the
radical left.
>> One of Trump's strategies to reclaim
Harvard is to hit the university where
it hurts, the pocketbook.
>> We had the federal government revoke
about $2.6 billion in federal research
grants.
>> And that's probably the most significant
because Harvard is known for doing
research.
Harvard studies have contributed to
advances on everything from childhood
cancer and Alzheimer's to new
innovations in artificial intelligence.
>> These are very important projects that
would really be for the good of of not
just the US but society as a whole.
>> In 2024, $686 million or 11% of its
operating revenue came from federal
research grants. That's a sizable amount
that's at risk even considering
Harvard's large endowment. Harvard is
the richest university with an endowment
of $53 billion.
>> But endowments must abide by strict
rules.
>> It does sound like a very nice pile of
money, but most of that money is
actually earmarked for very specific
causes.
>> A donor gives a gift to fund the soccer
team and you can't use that to buy
laboratory beakers. the gifts agreements
have to be enforced and then the
remainder much of it is tied up in
illquid investments and so you also
can't necessarily just tap that like a
ATM to fund whatever sort of problems
might come up.
>> Taxes are another point of contention.
>> In the first Trump administration a tax
on endowments was passed which right now
seems a little bit benign at 1.4% of net
investment return. But the latest tax
bill enacted by Congress raised that to
as high as 8%. Alongside this, he's
suggested revoking the school's
taxexempt status. Tax exempt status. I
mean, it's a privilege. That's really a
privilege.
>> Technically, the president is not able
to make decisions on which university or
organization is in fact taxexempt. This
is a decision that has to come from the
IRS. But it's something that he has
threatened repeatedly.
Harvard benefits from its tax exempt
status for not having to pay, for
example, taxes on its real estate
holdings, which are vast.
>> A Bloomberg analysis calculated the
value of Harvard's tax benefits to be at
least $465 million in 2023.
>> If Trump follows through on all of his
proposed efforts, Harvard could be
looking at a billion dollar a year
budget shortfall. It would be
destructive to Harvard, but the message
that it sends to the educational
community would be a very dire one.
Federal funding has also been pulled
from Colombia, Princeton, Cornell,
Northwestern, and others. Meanwhile, the
administration has subpoenaed data on
Harvard's international students.
>> I want to make sure that the foreign
students are people that can love our
country. The federal government has
control over issuing visas and the Trump
administration has tried to limit
Harvard from enrolling international
students. 27% of all students at Harvard
are international students and many of
them pay the full price. And this brings
in the university potential financial
cushion that they could lose if the
administration prevails in its efforts
to take away its ability to admit these
students.
A judge in Boston has issued a
preliminary injunction against those
efforts to ban foreign student
enrollment, recognizing Harvard's
argument that even the uncertainty
around its ability to enroll
international students can be very
damaging.
>> Alongside all this, the university has
found itself at the center of America's
culture wars. Supreme Court sharply now
curbing the use of race in college
admissions.
>> That ruling against Harvard was seen as
a victory by many Republicans.
>> Trump is not supportive of diversity,
equity, inclusion programs, something
that Harvard has been very supportive
of. He'd like to get rid of them.
[Music]
That same year, Israel was attacked by
Hamas, which has been designated by the
US and European Union as a terrorist
group. We saw in the months after that
protest arise on campuses across the
country protesting US support for Israel
in that conflict.
[Applause]
About 30 student groups put out a
statement that they blamed the attack
solely on Israel. We saw reports rise of
anti-semitic harassment on campus that a
lot of students were experiencing and
reporting.
>> Criticism of how the school handled the
upheaval fell heavily on Claudine Gay,
Harvard's first African-American
president.
>> Calling for the genocide of Jews
violates Harvard code of conduct.
Correct.
>> It depends on the context.
>> It does not.
>> She resigned under the pressure and
allegations of plagiarism in her
academic works fueled some to question
her qualifications for leading Harvard
in the first place.
>> Welcome.
>> Alan Garber replaced her and has taken
steps to curb anti-semitism and
anti-Muslim bias on campus.
But he's rejected government demands,
saying no government, regardless of
which party is in power, should dictate
what private universities can teach,
whom they can admit and hire, and which
areas of study and inquiry they can
pursue. Their argument is that the Trump
administration's fight is not really
about anti-semitism, that it's more
about trying to exert control over the
university and align the university more
with its own viewpoints rather than
actually encouraging diversity of
viewpoints.
>> They want to work with the
administration, but at the same time,
they don't agree with these methods of
how the Trump administration is trying
to exact change.
Another of Trump's tactics is to
threaten its accreditation.
>> It would be extremely painful and
honestly rather unfathomable for Harvard
to lose its accreditations. One of these
actions would certainly be financially
damaging to Harvard. But when you take
them in total, it becomes much more
crippling. The risk is that we sort of
lose our preeminent status as a top
destination for researchers and
scientists. The US has to maintain
competitiveness and that means having
worldleading universities, a strong NIH
and continuing to fund the breakthrough
science that led to the Cambridge
biotech ecosystem. This loss of prestige
may be the byproduct of a bigger
campaign to reshape education entirely.
For President Trump, it's really just
another way that he's used his influence
and his pressure in office to sort of
extract deals from stakeholders, whether
it's foreign countries, whether it's
businesses, and now with universities.
At a minimum, it's it's an effort to
rethink how universities in America are
funded. that has sweeping ramifications
in terms of do we then see corporates
step in and take in on more of a role in
supporting universities. Do we see
private equity firms back certain
research labs because they see potential
in early stage projects? And that just
raises, you know, a more existential
question of of do we want that?
>> For now, Harvard is fighting back,
winning at least some temporary legal
victories. They have really become the
leader when it comes to pushing back
against the Trump administration.
Harvard has sued to challenge the
freezing of those federal grants.
They're also seeking to prevent the
Trump administration from following
through in its efforts to ban
international student enrollment.
Since Harvard filed its lawsuit in
April, it's gotten tremendous support
from alumni, from faculty. People are
happy that someone is finally standing
up to Trump. you sort of have another
camp that, you know, would call for
trying to figure out some sort of common
ground. Um, that maybe digging in its
heels is not ultimately the most
effective way to attain Harvard's goals.
It's not an easy balance to walk.
[Music]